ANDRÉ DANIELS
Born: 28 December 1968
Parents: John and Roseline Daniels 
Married: Carmen Kaaping
Children: Kendra

André is one of five brothers born in Steenberg on the Cape Flats. Being the second youngest of the siblings who were all born far apart, he grew up feeling very much like a single child; although he took on the role of the protective “boeta” as his older brothers left the family home. Alcohol abuse played a hugely destructive role in André’s father’s life - resulting in spousal abuse and ultimately divorce after 29 years of marriage. His parents did eventually re-marry before his father passed away. Although the family moved often, André has fond memories of his father helping him with his studies as a teenager, but his father’s violent behaviour placed growing strain on their relationship. 

He recalls that although his parents didn’t go to church, his mother made sure that he attended Sunday school. Much of André’s life was influenced by the church and the men that he encountered in the community. He laments that his skewed perception of God as well as negative experiences at home contributed to his distorted understanding of masculinity as a young man.  Low self-esteem combined with the need to stay home to protect his mom were the reasons he married late, at the age of 34. 
André’s marriage to Carmen and the shared parenting of their daughter Kendra, together with his personal faith, has expanded and deepened his zest for life. Now, he finds it impossible to define himself outside of the love of God. A turning point was the realisation that Jeremiah 29:11 applied not only to him but to each and every person, including the women in his life. He maintains that since this promise applies to all of God’s children …. we don’t know where the other is on their journey or what God is working out in their lives – a perspective that helps him accept his own shortcomings and treat others with the dignity they deserve. 
Career
Storytelling has the potential to create a special bond between the teller and the listener. André’s fascination has always been the magic of storytelling through technology-- as a child sitting next to the radio, listening to Jet Jungle and Black Cat, and years later, watching television when it came to South Africa in 1976. This passion led him to freelance in community radio and television; and to become an in-demand wedding videographer as a young adult.

André’s interest in analogue to digital conversion led to his introduction to digital storytelling in 2005 when he assisted in the creation of an awareness campaign against the stigmatisation of people with HIV and AIDS. He realised how the application of technology could transform people’s lives. “I guess storytelling is one of the oldest forms of communication – a means of bonding and ensuring that culture and traditions are preserved and carried through the generations. One only has to look at the Bible to understand the power of stories. The “digital” part is just a consequence of the new tools available to us to tell stories.”

A full-time occupation as a digital storyteller was inevitable. As the Coordinator of Digital Media services at the University of the Western Cape’s Centre for Innovative Education and Communication, André’s passion is now applied within the context of education – perfect for passing on the magic of storytelling to generations to come. 

André has a Master’s Degree in Academic Development; and is a musician and avid road and mountain biker. 
