BARRY ISAACS

Born: 9 March 1945
Parents: Joseph and Hester Isaacs
Married to Farieda Gamaldien who became Rita Isaacs
Children: Donovan (1969-1990), Karen Selina, Barry Clint, Gillian Kay, Lynn Joy

Barry speaks about the “heritage of destiny”– the propelling power of things from the past that become a legacy to the present. “One way or another, we have received stuff and whether it’s good or bad, we have that” he says. From his mother, he learned the value of hard work. She would drive up and down the West Coast, selling things to earn extra money. Determinedly paving a new way when she bought the family a home in Surrey Estate. 

Barry’s father was a gentleman. “He would doff his hat for the women, and greet people. He said You always stand up if there’s a woman around. He was also a smart dresser … “we learnt that from our men.” But on weekends, behind closed doors, he was a different person. Controlled by alcohol, he became violent. “There were times where my mom had to run for her life. It was scary and that messed up family life.” Growing up, Barry knew he would never hit a woman. But his dysfunctional family situation propelled him out of the home -and into crime. As a teenager, he got involved in alcohol, drugs, robberies, break-in’s – and his parents never knew. Like his dad, Barry became a different person ‘outside the gate”.

At 22, at a religious meeting he was pressured into attending, Barry’s life changed. In a biblical Saul-like moment, he was “faced with God” and his perspective was revolutionized. He committed himself to Jesus Christ and a new life. His cynical community predicted the turnaround wouldn’t last, but 50 years on, Barry lives by his belief that everyone is made in the image of God, which makes respecting “my wife, my kids, the next man” inevitable. He also believes that young men need to understand their roots, so they can change their destiny. Among the various leadership roles that he holds in several ecumenical and multi-faith networks, Barry and Rita offers marriage enrichment and family counselling through Three Cord Family Development Services which they founded in 1990. 

He has buried his mother and father, his eldest son and a sister. It’s been a long journey but with God’s grace and joy of doing life with Rita, he has created a new legacy, and changed his family’s destiny. 

On losing our son
“Rita’s response to me was a game changer in our lives, in our ministry. She said: Barry, now we have to practice what we preach…and I said, What do you mean? And she said, the Bible says “we must give thanks in all things” And right there, we asked the Lord to help us through that and we said thank you.”

The bottom line….
“When I hit out at my wife or I beat up my kids, I’m hitting out at God because my children, my wife, the next man is all created in the image of God.”
