DANIEL HOORN

Born: 21 Oct 1938
Parents: Susan and Velaphi Isaac Hoorn
Siblings: 2 sisters and 2 brothers
Married Marie Leeman in 1970.  After her death in 2007 he married Minnie Samuels
Children: Eunice, Margaret, Susan, Elizabeth, Isaac, Caroline, Denzel, Jacquiline, Linda
Children not raised by Daniel: Thembeka, Norman (1966-2013)

Born in Douglas, Northern Cape, Daniel’s mother-tongue is Afrikaans. His dad was fought in World War II, was forcibly removed from the land on which the family farmed with cattle, pigs, sheep and goats; and then started a wood-cutting business, where Daniel worked. Leaving home at 18, Daniel lived briefly in De Aar and then moved to Cape Town. He vividly remembers his mother’s words when he left: “Kyk mooi na jouself, pasop vir jou vriende en respek grootmense” – an ethos that he continues to live by. 

To retain his humanity through the unrelenting oppression of apartheid, Daniel decided he had to stay out white people’s way. He recoiled into Silence. 

Daniel became a self-trained car mechanic. Together with his late wife, Marie, who was a domestic worker they raised 9 children. The couple firmly believed that each child had to be guided to find their own direction in life. While the church played an important role in his life, Daniel recalls how church leaders often struggled to assist people with the practical aspects of life “… en hulle het my toe gese djy moet die Here dien en djy moet soe en soe maak, maar toe dit by die difficulties en by die praktiese dinge kom, toe kon die kerk my nie help nie. So daar het ek toe op my manier iets uitgewerk met die opvoeding wat ek gekry het van my ouers. Toe besluit ek, ek wil maar direk met die Here werk. En toe sien ek die verskil. Net jou teenwoordigheid en die respek wat djy vir mense wys beteken baie. Op grond van daai, toe beland ek op om Help to Care te begin.” 

Concerned about the impact of absent fathers in single-parent households, Marie would insist that Daniel help struggling single mothers: “Oor die vroumense wie se man al oorlede is, het sy altyd gevra: Het djy al gaan kyk hoe gaan dit met sister dinges?...Waar die kerk se beleid gewies het dat djy as ‘n man mag nie alleenig met ‘n vroumens in jou kar ry nie, en die en daai, het ek maar gedoen wat ek kon om te help.”

Vrygrond Help to Care, is the culmination of Daniel and Marie’s love for God and care for people, whatever their religion or culture. After Marie died of a heart attack in 2007, Daniel married Minnie who carries on with the work of assisting him in providing care to people in Vrygrond.

Daniel believes that leaders must pay attention to their own need for healing. His advice to leaders is: “Call a Family Reunion, ask your parents, brothers and sisters to forgive you for things you may have done that hurt or disappointed them as you were growing up.” When forgiveness is exchanged, he says, they can receive God’s love, which will give them the direction they need to lead God’s people. He insists that love covers everything and it makes justice and freedom possible. 
