EARL ERASMUS

Birth Name: Ehrlich Everett Erasmus
Initiated Name: Autshumao
Born: 10 June 1974
Married to Joy Erasmus
Children: Jaylyn, Joshua-Heru, and Kai

The calling of Earl’s life is to touch the lives of other men, to help them bring the feminine and the masculine together using indigenous rites of passage in the wilderness. Coming full circle to his komvandaan – his Khoisan ancestral traditions – took him many years of being lost, in a spiritual and emotional wilderness far from the small town of Willowmore in the Karoo desert where he grew up. 

Powerful influences shaped Earl’s formative years: the complexities of poverty, the personal shame of being “illegitimate” and the internalised shame of his people, often called Bushmen; growing up in a staunch Christian home, raised by women whose love and care would erupt into terrifying violence against drunken uncles. “I used to go lay under the bed and just cry until everything’s done. I felt very, very helpless.” Besides his mother, grandmother and aunts, there was the neighbour,  Sies Bok – a woman “that I wanted to be like because she represented freedom - freedom from the constraints of our congregational faith and beliefs. She represented the antithesis to the strictness in our house … she touched people’s lives.” Earl longed for a father, a hero, different to the men in his life - who would embrace him and make it all OK. Instead, his own journey led him through alcoholism, drug addiction, a pornography addiction, homelessness and absent fatherhood – always longing for love and intimacy and not able to find, or birth it. 

Finding the way back to his own path came through meeting people at strategic moments, and in nature. Through his wife Joy, and men he encountered in the military who became like family. Through Colridge Daniels who took young men on wilderness hikes and encouraged them to tell their stories. On solo quests under the stars, alone “with your Creator and your ancestors”, Earl grew to understand the powerful feminine and masculine forces that had shaped him. He speaks about his friend Rodney Hendricks, who “appeared around corners when I needed to find my way” and Oom Dawid Gabriels who took him in off the streets, nurtured and encouraged him to continue his tertiary education. “These moments came through … trauma and terrible experiences, but in the spirit of my mother – she never gave up.”

Earl’s intense longing for his father ended when he finally saw him for the first time, in his coffin. He had come to a place where he could whisper forgiveness and wish his father well on his journey to the other side. And in that “Father Moment” of self-healing, his relationship with Joy took on a more profound dimension. It was a komvandaan of the masculine and feminine – and Earl’s gift to the world. 

healing
“we create those spaces, and if a man wants to go deeper, we say to them let’s take you on a journey and we go out into the wilderness….” 