Men Affirming Dignity
An Introduction to the Exhibition

The world over, there are calls for human rights to be recognised and protected. Colonialism, slavery and apartheid have institutionalised the denial of African/Black people’s humanity and agency. Eurocentric perspectives often profile Africa and Africans as persistent human catastrophes in need of help. This dismissal of African humanity is rooted in the context of ethnocentric European assertions that white European men are rational agents, thus fully human. White women were regarded as imperfect humans lacking rationality, whereas the basic humanity of all non-Europeans - especially Africans - was rejected. These oppressive belief systems, namely white supremacy and patriarchy normalised a belief that God created black people and women to be subordinate to Europeans and men.
These notions of domination and subordination continue to erode the soul of people. In South Africa, they have profound implications for relationships between women and men. Gender-based violence is one of the most tragic outcomes.
About SAFFI
It is in this context that the South African Faith & Family Institute (SAFFI) – established in 2008, engages the faith dimensions of the root causes of gender-based violence. A key aspect of this work is to demystify the universalised profiling that reinforces the inhumane versus heroic profiling of Africans/Black people in South Africa, the African continent and the diaspora.

This talking back (to borrow Black feminist bell hooks’ term) at the profiling of African men as predominantly violent and immoral is rooted in SAFFI Founder - Elizabeth Hoorn’s - experience of growing up with her father, Daniel Hoorn. Daniel never used violence, abuse or shaming in his dealings with people in general, and more specifically, with her mother and eight siblings. Acknowledging men like her Dad whose sense of ubuntu has deeply enriched their own and others’ lives - has inspired the Men Affirming Dignity initiative. This ubuntu “speaks of the fact that my humanity is caught up and is inextricably bound up in yours” in the words of Archbishop Desmond Tutu. SAFFI’s Ubuntu feminist-based approach is about critically engaging oppressive belief systems and seeking to “treat in each human being the entire humanity” (Nkulu-N’Sengha, 1999).
About Men Affirming Dignity (MAD)
The MAD exhibition seeks to weave narratives that have remained muted and undocumented into social history. The first in a series, this exhibition places particular focus on Coloured men who live on the Cape Flats. These are men who live out their humanity in ways that subvert oppressive systems – hence the acronym MAD.
Drawing on an understanding of African cultural and historical reality based on African-generated criteria, the MAD exhibition does not romanticise but amplifies the humanity of ‘Coloured’ African men as they navigate histories of dislocation, oppression and survival. The men who graciously agreed to participate in this exhibition do not see themselves as “heroes”, “real men” or “good men”. The sources and resources they draw on to affirm dignity in their intimate and public relationships are highlighted. It is their quest; and one that has been proven to heal relationships between women and men.
Ruben Richards – patron of MAD, in his book Bastaards or Humans: the unspoken heritage of coloured people – origins / identity / culture and challenges (2015), reminds us that “Coloured and their indigenous Khoisan [Bushman] ancestry (as opposed to their European ancestry) were not always considered or treated as human beings”. As Uncle Willy, one of the MAD participants laments: “You cannot uproot people and throw them in a concrete jungle and expect them to become sane human beings…people need space, they need to know that they are loved…The fathers today are those young people who were beaten up during apartheid…and violence breeds violence. We shouldn’t turn to guns to kill each other - those were the weapons that the police used during apartheid to kill us.”

Consistent with modern scientific views of Africa as the cradle of humankind and civilization, studies of genetic variation confirm that modern humans originated in southern Africa. A Stanford study concluded that “the Bushmen had the greatest genetic variation and are most likely to be the source population from which all other African populations diverged” (Standford Report, 7 March 2011).
Who knows – through its ‘coloured’ / Khoi / San African people, South Africa might hold a few keys to Ubuntu in intimate relationships. This MAD exhibition may serve as a catalyst to unlocking it.
Dr Ruben Richards’s abovementioned book has been integrated in the history curriculum of high school learners by the Western Cape Education Department – another significant moment as we continue to excavate dormant histories and amplify the life affirming contributions to civilization made by ‘coloured’ / Khoi / San African people.
The Cape Flats
- also known as coloured townships were created through the racialised legislative processes of the Group Areas Act (1950) during the apartheid era. These townships and the processes of racial classification and forced relocation … imbued the racial category ‘coloured’ with unique political, physical, spatial and socio-economic meaning. (Elaine Salo, 2005)


