FAGRIE NASIEP

Born: 16 February 1962
Parents: Suleiman Nasiep and Salega Slamdien
Siblings: 9
Married to Subeida Benjamin
Children: Shehaam, Nasreen, Riyaad, Tauhier, and Aneeqah

Born in Salt River into a family that frequently moved home, gave fashion designer, Fagrie, an exposure to life on the Cape Flats that he describes as a fantastic journey. He considers himself privileged: although protective, his parents encouraged him to speak freely at home, and this shaped his life, particularly as a high school student activist and later, in his career. 

For Fagrie, dialogue and open discussion in multi-cultural, multi-racial groups became important in challenging the stereotypes and divisions of apartheid – and he continues to honour this tradition in deliberately bridging gaps between cultures and religions. 

Fagrie strongly believes that internalizing the trauma of apartheid created both a resilience in his generation and an inability to express trauma and anger that is contributing to problems that are prevalent on the Cape Flats today.  In his workspace, Fagrie continues to challenge a status quo which purports to be liberal, but where the old strata remain: Whites are in management, Coloureds are seamstresses, and Blacks are cleaning staff.  Fagrie mentors aspiring young designers and insists that their internships go beyond administrative duties such as photocopying and filing. He underscores personal leadership and respect for people’s humanity as he exposes them to various aspects of the industry.

on change
“you must have the will, you must want to have the change… and you must reach out. You must set yourself up for all those things.”

open discussion
“I try and honour the traditions and also point out the detriment that traditions can have on certain aspects of our humanity.”

moving forward
“I gained more out of leaving than having to stay … I think that if something really bothers you – step out of it. Move on! Going forward is always my motto. I’m interested in what is going to happen next!”

