STATE OF MIND
Hagin Kortjie 
Born: 2 May 1996
Parents: Cecil Elvis and Maureen Augusta Adams Kortjie 
Siblings: 1 older brother

Francois Titus 
Born: 17 May 1995
Parents: Franciskus and Jo-anne Titus 
Siblings: 2 younger sisters

When gospel rappers - cousins Hagin and Francois look back at their pre-gospel phase, they’re not proud. Their rap was vulgar, aggressive – angry at government, their community of Eerste River, at life... And yet, that concern about the “air looming” over the Cape Flats still informs their music now: the air of a generation of parents whose vision was stripped by apartheid and who are, in turn, raising a generation with no vision. “It’s about a generation of people walking around freely, yet still in chains.” 

A precognition that they would one day rap gospel materialised when a cousin asked them to perform a gospel song with him – their first performance as State of Mind. That night, the audience “just exploded!” Over time the cousins came full circle, back to the values of their Christian homes. 

Now State of Mind rap “Word” - holding up a mirror of possibilities: of living purposefully and reminding people that “it’s not over”, that “God is still in control.” 

A tight-knit, musically oriented extended family is “the root of who we are”. Both their parents taught them that nothing was more important than family. Hagin believes that his parents enrolled him in schools outside of their community to prevent him being sucked into the rut so many of his peers were in. They speak of their fathers with pride – men who taught them love through quality time and who showed them discipline through example. It’s who they want to be for their wives and kids one day.

Francois relates how he experimented with drugs in high school, causing terrible tension at home. After a particularly ugly incident, he had stormed out and slept at a friend’s house. Leaving school the next day, he saw his worried dad waiting at the gate. He had driven around Eerste River all night, searching for his son; and had sacrificed a day of work to find him. His father arranged for Francois to work with him that school holiday – together every day, forced to talk, to rebuild their relationship. He recently said to Francois: “I fixed you up without beating you”. To this day, Francois is grateful for that intervention which changed his life completely.

Hagin believes that as “born-free’s”, they can help South Africans heal from the legacy of apartheid: “there’s a lot of pain that South Africa has, that our parents have. This generation … they feel this weight on them to express this pain. It’s not them speaking – it is the air of this country … the pain that South Africa has felt for hundreds of years. We need to allow this generation to do what they have to do. South Africa has a story to tell – they are the best people to tell it through music, arts, dance, etc.”

purpose
“It’s waking up every morning and on purpose you have to decide: this is who I am going to be today.”
