JOHN BEAN

Born: 22 September 1966
Parents: Doreen Goliath and John Carstens. Stepfather: Adolph Peter Goliath
Married to Elizabeth Trollip (deceased in 2015)
Children: Preston, Kayle and Keshia
Grandchildren: 2

John recalls his love for the Church from a very young age – he was 6 when he became an altar boy. Growing up without a father, it was the guidance of strong male leaders in the church that “protected us from becoming outcasts”. It was in the church that John’s passion for music was nurtured. His involvement with New Birth, the sought-after Cape Flats gospel group in his 20’s and early 30’s was life-changing. John’s marriage to his late wife, Elizabeth, with whom he raised three children, was based on a deep love of God and each other. She was his confidante as he struggled to come to terms with his sexual identity and coming out as a gay Christian. His decision to leave New Birth to avoid putting them through a scandal, was a low point in his life. 

gospel music: New Birth
“We had some of the amazing musicians and singers that South Africa had to offer at the time. We were not conceited about it, but we knew we were good.”
“The right people always came along, but they also came with their baggage… they found comfort and healing because we treated each other with so much dignity …”
“New Birth was a vehicle during the apartheid system for a lot of hopeless young people on the Cape Flats.”

sexual identity…
“I knew … I’m leaving my New Birth family behind because I have to go and find out who I am and what is God’s purpose for this man because I still firmly believed I’m not done, I’ve got so much within me still… With my kids it was easy … because I loved them so much and I was present.”

“But I still had all this music inside of me -- and the worship…. I’m a worshipper at heart! It’s going to explode if I don’t give an outlet to it. Then in 2001 we started Friends in Harmony”

John encourages the young Coloured person to believe that their situation can change for the better; and that nothing stays the same. He believes that staying true to oneself is key to living out ones’ purpose. Decades after leaving New Birth, John provides mentorship and support to the group and its members – a reflection of his unconditional love expressed through his calling as a leader.
