PATRICK PICKERING

Born: 5 March 1957
Parents: Eva and Henry Pickering 
Married to Mavis Delores Sefoor
Children: Lionel Patrick, Marius, and Curnell Charles

Patrick’s recollection of his father was of a man who handled his family like he was still fighting the second world war. His mother, on the other hand, taught him that love, compassion and service to others were the way to live. Patrick promised himself not to follow his dad’s example but that he would raise his family differently.  

Patrick recalls painful experiences of beatings by apartheid police in front of his peers at school while the school principal was a helpless on-looker. He talks about the devasting impact of the use of alcohol and drugs and the fights that ensue among family members --  the persistent impact of apartheid infused trauma on the love that family should show each other.

Patrick recalls having to persuade the parents of the young woman he fell deeply in love with, Mavis - who eventually became his wife - that even though his family did not have much, he would provide the best life for her. Patrick and Mavis have three sons and he speaks passionately about his love for his growing family and the lessons he learns from his sons. “… as I’ve promised God, when You give me a family, it will never be like it was in my upbringing”. He recalls accepting his son’s challenge: “…one thing that I’ve done wrong - I give more to the community than I give to my family… So the Holy Spirit had to talk to me…speak in my heart and then, I changed.”

This transformative experience put Patrick on a path of devoted service to his family and the community in Atlantis. He believes that he is a guide, sharing his biblical understanding with men that fatherhood is a calling and that despite life’s challenges, they must keep their focus on that calling. He teaches that women and men carry the same spirit, which must translate into care and respect for women; and that family always comes first. 

He speaks of how the respect bestowed on him by his community now all comes back to his faith and his Mom: “I always first look to Christ ... and I take it from there, because that is what my Mom told me.”

service
“I stay for 39 years in Atlantis, to serve the community. This is what my mother taught me – to love other people”.

teachings about women and men
“In the Bible, I read … that women don’t have another spirit as men – we all have the same spirit. So we are equal because of the same Spirit that we carry…”
