QUENTIN RAPITSE

Born: 24 February 1977
Parents: Lorna and Ronnie Norman Rapitse
Siblings: 2 brothers and 1 sister
Married to Anneline Francis Barkhuis
Child: Joren Lee 

For the first five years of his life, Quentin spoke only isiXhosa. Born and raised in Gugulethu in the house which belonged to his grand-father who was a migrant from Lesotho; then moving with his mother and brother to a council house in Manenberg where Afrikaans was spoken, he saw the value of multi-lingualism as his brother who spoke both languages navigated the teasing of their new neighbours. Fluent in Afrikaans after a few years, he forgot isiXhosa, but having once had that tradition, he dreams of connecting with his grand-father’s lineage to reclaim this aspect of his indigenous identity.

Quentin’s father, who was frequently absent, rejoined the family in Manenberg. His mother never said that his dad was in prison she told them that he was away in high school. Visiting his dad at various prisons became regular family outings for his mother and his siblings. Life on the Cape Flats was hard and his dad started a shebeen, selling liquor illegally from the house, to provide for the family. Early in his life, Quentin saw how alcohol addiction “enslaved” and demoralized people. When drunk, his father became violent and beat his mother mercilessly. As children “paralysed” by the violence, they lived in fear of their lives. Quentin promised himself never to touch alcohol or drugs as an adult. Disillusioned with life, his dad often told them that they will amount to nothing. Without being disrespectful, Quentin and his siblings vowed to prove to their dad that a different life is possible. Quentin and his late brother, Jerome devoted themselves to their faith and became actively involved in church. He speaks fondly about the mentoring and guidance from Manenberg Assemblies of God congregation where they spent most of their young lives into adulthood.

An opportunity to assist at a men’s basketball coaching clinic at the University of the Western Cape led to Quentin qualifying with an age exemption for a BA degree in Sport Recreation and Management. Being offered a coaching position on the basketball team enabled him to pay for his studies; and his involvement progressed from positions on the Student Sports Body to provincial and national sports structures. Becoming national coach and accompanying the South African team to the World Student Games in Belgrade in 2009 was a huge privilege. Quentin has retired from sport but remembers with gratitude, the benefits of after-school programmes by university students and young professionals. In the same way he is paying it forward by assisting students from Manenberg to explore opportunities to create sustainable futures for themselves and their families. He teaches various subjects and coaches athletics and sports at a primary school in Athlone.

language
“…but my grandparents, they spoke Sotho and the children couldn’t understand – it was almost a language only for grownups.”

sport
“whatever I’ve been given, the opportunities I’ve received, I have a responsibility to share it with those coming in behind me…”
