RAVEN BENNY

Born: 17 January 1971
Parents: Larry Peter Benny and Joan Rosa Fortein
Siblings: 4 brothers
Married to Glynnis Anne Klink
Children: Monique Klink, Rushkah Miller, Chadd Anthony Sauls, Aimee, and Alexander Larry 


Reflecting on his childhood growing up in Vrygrond and later Valhalla Park, Raven recalls the poverty around him and his sadness at seeing people cope with even fewer resources than his family had. Church, strict discipline and lots of humour are highlights of his memories of growing up with his parents and four brothers. Raven was responsible for taking care of his brothers while his parents were at work. As children they saw the best and worst of people navigating the hardships of life. Witnessing a convicted criminal, a heavily tattooed man, take on his family responsibilities after his wife was killed, opened Raven’s eyes to the possibility of the “re-emergence” of people when a car accident left him paralysed in all four limbs, with limited function in his hands. 

As a quadriplegic husband, father and disabled member of society, Raven’s re-emergence and reclaiming agency in his family and society started at home, with a small incident a few months into his recovery in November 2000.

Raven’s family had struggled to adapt to his return from five and a half months in hospital. He believes that his dad died of a broken heart because he was not able “fix” his son. Raven recounts how, in the early days after the accident, his wife had to take care of him while also looking after their 4 children and young baby. An incident of incontinence brought these issues into sharp focus – and resolution. After twice wetting their bed one morning and his wife twice having to change the bed linen, the washing line snapped as she hung up the sheets, which fell into the dust. His wife broke down and cried. Although he felt bad, Raven gently persuaded her that she could fix the washing line with his assistance. As they worked together, he understood that their roles had changed but that he was still a man, still her husband. “See? It was a big moment in my life because I would give everything to fix that for her but … it is what it is and I’m man enough to accept this -- so let’s make it work.”

Invited to attend a wheelchair rugby game between SA and the Great Britain wheelchair rugby team in 2002, Raven was hooked. He joined a wheelchair rugby team and soon excelled: he has won SA colours and represented the national side in 2003 and 2005. In 2019 Raven was appointed Chief Operating Officer of the Quadpara Association of South Africa - an advocacy group for the rights of people with disabilities. He is also a contributor and the Managing Editor of Rolling Inspiration magazine.


