Our Patron -  Dr Ruben R. Richards
I congratulate the South African Faith & Family Institute on the Men Affirming Dignity initiative.  Thank you for bestowing on me the honour of Founding Patron – an awesome privilege indeed.
The context of the launch of the Men Affirming Dignity exhibition is multi-layered and bears a few moments for reflection. Firstly, the launch is taking place on 27 April, a significant public holiday in South Africa – Freedom Day. Its roots go back to 1994 when, for the first time in the history of South Africa, all citizens voted as a unified society using the one-person one-vote electoral system.
Secondly, the launch takes place in a world that is still struggling to come to terms with the Covid-19 pandemic. Globalisation has meant that unlike other pandemics, Covid-19 has touched all corners of the globe in a very short space of time. One is reminded of the impact of pandemics such as smallpox which wiped out three quarters of the San and Khoi population during the 18th century in South Africa. This devastation among the indigenous San and Khoi was tragic more so because they did not have natural immunisation against European diseases which were brought to Africa. No doubt Covid-19 is an indiscriminate virus which has caused untold havoc, not only within the world economy, but also within the confines of intimate societal and family living. The advent of lockdowns and forced isolation has meant that families have had to adjust to “living up-close” with each other. The family and/or household unit has been forced to face new challenges around sharing limited space. While many have found this to be a positive experience, there has also been an unfortunate outcome, namely, an increase in gender-based violence (GBV). We know that GBV occurs primarily in the context of intimate relationships. The “new normal” of being forced to live together in a more confined manner has resulted in relationships having to recalibrate in finding the best way to honour and respect each other as well as allow each other space. This is more difficult in poorer communities with limited and overcrowded living spaces. It is in this context that it is so refreshing to discover men who continue to press through their circumstances and affirm the dignity of others.
Thirdly, barely 27 days ago, the Traditional Khoi and San Leadership Bill of 2019 has become law in South Africa. As of 1 April 2021, it became easier to publicly claim one’s indigenous heritage without fear of contravening the law of the country. This begs the question: Do you need the law of the country to legitimise your identity and existence?
The tectonic plates of societal identity in South Africa have shifted dramatically. It is the first time in the recent 500-year history of South Africa that a sitting government has included the San and Khoi people in the fabric of parliamentary and political decision making. The significance thereof becomes pronounced when one realises that the San and Khoi, considered the first people/nation of South Africa were, together with their descendants classified by the colonial and apartheid system as Coloured people. The people who have survived state-sponsored genocide in earlier centuries and the worst forms of colonial and apartheid oppression including identity and alcohol abuse and the flooding of Cape Flats townships with drugs.
The devastation and havoc caused by the ‘dop’ system is still ever present. A society does not easily or quickly recover from centuries of paying farm worker wages in alcohol, not cash. One is also reminded of the entrenched structural trauma of being made invisible in the land of ancestors who were the original owners of the land. All these factors makes the amplification of the humanity of ‘Coloured’ African men who affirm dignity all the more notable.
The Men Affirming Dignity biographies which are exhibited at the launch of this initiative focus on “Coloured males”, many of whom consciously claim their indigenous heritage. Others are in the process of redefining their cultural identity in the twenty-first century. The common thread that weaves through these biographies is that despite the most horrendous of circumstances, these men have resisted the temptation to become abusers. They have affirmed their own dignity as well as that of the other - especially women. They have broken the stranglehold of negative stereotypes such as gangsters, lovers of violence, abusive, alcoholics and uneducated which accompany the descriptor, Coloured Male. By some stroke of luck, even divine intervention, these men have survived the relentless abuse of coloured identity by systems such as colonialism and apartheid and social engineering designed to ensure that coloured males do not progress beyond a certain level of civilisation in South Africa.
I salute these individuals whose stories confirm the oft-quoted expression: Don’t judge a book by its cover. This expression has such relevance in a context where race-based bias and prejudice are premised on external appearances/covers. In this context I have redefined my own life’s mission as wanting to contribute to the restoration of identity where the end game is captured by a mantra I have crafted: “Judge me by my vision for the future and not the past that I represent and cannot change”. I believe this will also hold true for Men Affirming Dignity.
