SHAWN GEORGE 

Born: 10 March 1972
Birth Parents: Sarah George and Gert Garrett
Foster Parents: John Jarrett and Dinah Francis Jarrett 
Married to Lauren Davids
Children: Kirsty and Azariah

“Faith gives you a certain discipline”, says Shawn. “That discipline is consistency. Consistency is getting up every morning, making the bed, fixing your hair, brushing your teeth – no matter what is going on in your life. It’s holding on to your dignity in the small moments that creates the sum total of who you are, and the value you bring to society. If you consistently do what you are called to, you will get to all the connecting points in your life -- through your darkest hour, to the next point.” This is the ethos that Shawn promotes as co-founding pastor at God Chaser Church, and as an educator at Sevenplus Community College for adults aspiring to obtain a matric certificate. 

For Shawn, faith was a literal sanctuary in the apartheid era, as police could not invade church buildings - unlike the streets and schools where they shot and tear-gassed without provocation. His close friend, 14-year-old Melvin, became paraplegic after he was shot by police while walking home one day “… he did nothing weird – he was just walking home, but he was seen as a threat, and that is what apartheid made of us -- a threat.” Shawn became very aware of how Coloured people were “shoved into one space and then the survival of the fittest … was the rule of the day”. He lived in Belhar extension 13 where going to the shop came with a parental warning to be on the lookout for shootings. 

Taken into foster care at 3 months by an aunt and uncle who already had 12 children, he lived a sheltered, faith-based life. His uncle was his world and instilled “so much good in me … the things I hold dear. We were taught to live by the fruit of the Spirit.” Life in this tight-knit family was filled with love, warmth and generosity. 

When his biological mother married and took Shawn to live with her at age 11, it was a dream come true -- until he was rudely awakened to the chaos of alcoholism and domestic violence. “There were just fights every single day – physical fights, blood everywhere, they literally beat each other up. My mom was saved, a religious woman, but … I couldn’t find peace in this house.” Shawn sadly recalls how abuse changed his mothers’ character. “And at that point already, I decided I would never raise my hand at a woman.” 

Shawn’s world collapsed when his beloved uncle died. “I was 25, but when he passed on, I was a boy again because this guy replaced the sense of loss I experienced with my biological father and made up for it in so many ways. I completely shut everyone out.” When he was at his lowest, he met Lauren. Lauren’s “sense of self”, and his aunt’s strength helped Shawn face the world again. “This woman kept on going, kept on walking, and it gave me the strength to say, this is the way, we have to keep moving along… go where the air is – that’s where you breathe.” 

Marrying Lauren, after a few rude awakenings about their expectations of each other’s roles, Shawn realised “if I don’t make adjustments, I cannot expect of her to change. I needed to mature as a human being and accept that this is a partnership…We decided to just journey together … if we can co-habit in the same space, find out what works, we will be okay.”
