William Edward George Newhoudt (Uncle Willy)

Born: 30 July 1937
Parents: Frederick Alexander and Rosalina Newhoudt 
Married to Margaret Elizabeth Maroney
Children: Beulah, Wilma, Eleanor, Milinda, and Michelle
Grandchildren: 4

If Uncle Willy’s life was to be described in a paragraph, it would tell of a humble upbringing as one of four children of a ship supplier and his wife; of his kind father and strict mother who instilled a love of learning in him. It would describe his vision of hope, peace and justice for the poor and a conviction that churches must be of practical use to their congregations. That, when he co-founded New World Foundation over 40 years ago, he saw the community development organization as an extension of the church he serves in the community of Lavender Hill. It would pay tribute to his decades of service as a lay preacher and counsellor in that community. It would mention that he and the love of his life, Margaret, raised five daughters and got them all through university. And -- because it matters to his daughters -- it would convey their gratitude that his way of disciplining them would be to sit them down and gently invite a conversation – never hitting or using harsh language. Because he was raised that way by his own father.

When Uncle Willie counsels men in his church, it is from this place of encouragement. To men who interpret the bible as giving them permission to treat their wives as lesser, or St Paul’s injunction to women to “be in submission” to their husbands as permission to beat them, he reminds that St Paul also says: But husbands, you are to love your wives the way Christ loved his church, and that Jesus gave his life for his church. She will give everything because you give her everything, he tells them.

When their second daughter, Wilma, became deaf through illness, Uncle Willie and his wife were devastated. Helping Wilma cope in unfamiliar territory was difficult as the world was not equipped to accommodate deaf people back then. However, her deafness turned into a blessing they could never have anticipated. She returned from Gallaudet University in Washington, D.C. with a Master’s degree, and in 1994, became a Member of Parliament, lobbying for full rights for deaf and hard-of-hearing people. She has been recognised internationally for her achievements and has been instrumental in lobbying South African government to recognize Sign Language as a home language and the 12th offcial language.

Uncle Willie’s philosophy is simply: the more you give, the more you receive. Raise your children with love, they will love you right back. Love your wife with Christ’s love, and you will receive everything in return. Never give up on your mentally or physically challenged child, and they will fly. His life is proof that it’s worked. 

values
“My dad would always say: ‘my son, Willie, when you buy something on credit, come Friday and even if it’s your last, pay the man – he was good to you.’ And I always remembered that lesson.”


